how are you planning to protect your
infrastructure from being overwhelmed by
an increase of load
or what happens if there's a temporary
blip which impacts the stability of your
application
are you building a multi-tenanted
service and you need to protect
some tenants from some kind of noisy
neighbor then tune into this episode
where i'm joined by john downs once
again
and we talk through three different
patterns today
the throttling pattern the retry pattern
and the circuit breaker pattern
listen in to find out more
hello and welcome back to another
episode of cloud with chris
you're with me chris reddington and
we'll be talking about all things cloud
so as we mentioned in the intro there we
will be continuing the discussion
of architecting for the cloud one
pattern at a time which is
coming along very nicely and we're once
again joined by
my colleague john downs who i'm very
pleased to have back with me because
we had a great discussion previously on
the deployment stamps pattern
so without further ado we'll just go
ahead and jump straight
in and not waste any time so all there
is to say
is uh good morning or good evening john
how are you doing sir good morning chris
i'm well thank you how are you
yes all good thank you all kids and uh
once again recording at fun hours of the
day for both of us but it's okay it's uh
part of the fun exactly the good thing
about being on a
planet that's a globe indies indeed
getting to the deep topics really
quickly there
excellent so um yeah i guess we've got a
few different topics that we're going to
cover today because
we've got a few different ideas relating
to
potentially multi-tenancy and noisy
neighbours and protecting those
kinds of organizations thinking about
stability and just
i would consider them some of the basics
of the cloud design patterns as well to
be honest these are kind
of the staples of if you're building a
brand new application to the cloud you
want to go and make sure that you've got
things in order so
i'll let you reveal maybe what some of
those are but that's at least my
perspective on
on these ones we're talking about today
yeah absolutely because i agree with you
i mean for the for me especially the
the the second second and third of these
patterns
they're almost not really architectural
patterns they're just kind of good
coding practice patterns that i think
make sense everywhere the cloud kind of
uniquely requires them but um
uh but they certainly are useful
everywhere and they're a bit different
to i guess some of the other patterns
that that you've talked about and that
we talked about previously
that are kind of more conceptual more
about how the entire solution works
these are quite focused on on
coding and kind of how services work
yeah absolutely very tangible aren't
they so i guess we've uh teased it up
uh long enough we should probably
actually get into some of the topics
here so
i'll bring up your screen here so
everyone can see the first one
that we're going to be talking about
which is the throttling pattern and i
guess
people normally talk about you know i've
been throttled or this that or the other
so they may have an idea of what it
means but
we should probably just level set just
in case uh there are folks who don't
really understand the term throttling
there as well
yeah because throttling has kind of a
negative sound to it but it doesn't
necessarily have to be so
the throttling pattern is really there
to help protect
a service from high load or from from
load that's that's kind of not expected
or that's not uh not welcome i guess
so a really good example of this is api
rate limits if you're hosting an api
and you uh you you allow your clients to
connect to that api and make requests
then you want to make sure that that
your application isn't going to be
overwhelmed by
lots and lots of requests either from
the same from the same
customer or the same user or the same ip
address or even just broadly over the
entire uh
over everybody who's accessing it and so
throttling is really there to protect
your services
and any downstream services or
components that you might have so things
like databases
uh or you know back-end service that you
talk to um or potentially third-party
services as well
so thrilling is really formed from the
it's something that we think about from
the perspective of
um a service right it's it's a thing
that the service
does as part of its behavior absolutely
and
i know that um the third pattern we'll
talk about as well the circuit breaker
pattern
uh relates to this one very closely as
well so
i won't give the game away just yet
we'll come back to that later but
uh if people are thinking it's just an
on off switch
and it's kind of binary one or the other
it doesn't necessarily have to be like
that either and this is the magic of
bringing multiple patterns together to
start building some advanced scenarios
isn't it
yeah yeah and i think you made a really
good point there chris which is that
i think when we when we think about
throttling then one of the things that
uh that we generally think about and and
often many systems are designed this way
is
uh there's kind of a binary gate almost
right so you're basically saying
this request is allowed then this
request is allowed and no we put the
wall up
now this request isn't allowed here
anymore um and and this i mean that's
that is a very common
approach and it's one that works really
well for many systems um
but that's that's only one way that you
can use the throttling pattern
um so that approach you know it's it's
it's
many many azure services for example uh
use that that kind of approach
um so if you for example use cosmos db
um or
service bus or some of those services
that are multi-tenant services where you
provision a certain amount of capacity
that that you want to be able to use
if you try and go over that capacity
then then we'll basically just you know
shut down the the service from you for a
period of time
um but one of the the interesting things
about that is that
in some of those services uh if you
actually pay attention to how the
the service is communicating that
message back to you
in the case of http uh responses for
example
we'll often send that response as an
http 429
which basically just means you're going
too fast slow down
but in the case of something like cosmos
db there's actually a response header
that we include in that response to say
uh this is what we call the retry after
header so in other words here's how long
you should wait
before you try over try making this
request again
uh we'll talk about retries in a bit
more detail shortly but it's interesting
to know that there's
you can just the server can kind of give
some hints back to the client about
um about what when they expect uh that
they're going to be back to be able to
serve the request again
absolutely and i think that's the nice
thing and the reason why we've
kind of coupled these three patterns
together right is because you can see
that one
really closely relates to the other
closely relates to the other again there
so
good good yeah absolutely yeah yeah and
so i think the
the like i said returning a four to nine
or
you know blocking a request is is one
approach to dealing with rolling
um but i think the the design pattern
that i've got on on screen at the moment
actually does a good job of talking
about some of the other approaches that
you could possibly use
um to try and again protect the back end
systems that you're dealing with
or to uh to reduce the load um while not
necessarily just
cutting everybody off right um so one
approach for example
that's talked about a little bit in here
is that you could potentially have
uh have the ability to detect when
you're going over some sort of limit
and then you potentially turn off
aspects of your system so you turn off
particular features
um a really interesting example of this
which
is on a kind of a longer time scale but
uh
is uh during the early days of the
covert pandemic
um microsoft teams actually shut down
some of the features in microsoft teams
because it was being so heavily used
and to be able to use that capacity for
you know the core
services and teams uh they shut down
some of the components so things like uh
read receipts
for messages um they just said we're
just gonna turn off that entire service
that entire feature
um so again that's it's interesting to
think about the fact that you might have
these kind of
knobs you can turn to to be able to
enable or disable
uh particular features that might not be
as critical
um and your load recovers or the the
rates uh requests go down
you can turn the back up again
dynamically
and that's a really brilliant point
because i think a lot of the time when
we talk requirements we get a lot of
people thinking the big picture that hey
my
system needs to be online or serving
users or whatever the requirement may be
for
at this volume for this amount of time
etc but
quite often i don't see people really
think about what the core aspects are of
the system so
you know if if something bad happens and
you know we get a surge in
in requests for whatever reason then
actually
we can shut off and i guess we're almost
getting a little bit
into a bulkhead pattern there as well
and being able to segment
some of our different aspects of the
solution but being able to say right
we need components uh one component five
component seven the rest we can just
turn off uh is a really good way of
looking at it
exactly yeah yeah yeah and it's yeah and
it's it's
it's i was waiting to see how long it
took for us to use the r word
requirements um in this conversation
because i know you and i are both a big
fan of
of trying to figure through that nine
minutes roughly
exactly yeah didn't take long at all um
but the uh another aspect to that as
well
is that um uh this is a little bit off
topic but
when i talk to customers about things
like disaster recovery and building
resilience
um that kind of idea of having some
parts of your system that are absolutely
critical and have to be working
all the time or to a very high level
versus the parts that don't
um it's useful to distinguish those and
in the documentation we we call we talk
about rto and rpo
recovery time objective recovery point
objective there's also that another one
and the recovery level objective rlo
which i think doesn't get enough
attention so that's that same kind of
idea
uh but of course throttling is kind of
talking about that on a on a slightly
different level um just talking about
how
uh you know how load can affect the
ability for features to run
and then the the other aspect another
another way that you can um
think about doing throttling is to
re-prioritize requests
so if you've got all of your requests
coming in um then potentially you you
don't necessarily want to cut
off customers when they get to a certain
point but what you might do for example
is send their requests
to a lower priority queue all right so
if there's nobody else using the system
then they'll still get processed as
normal if there is somebody else using
the system then they'll get bumped at
the bottom of the list
until they're there um uh until they've
their rate limit is reset or or the
situation is resolved
um and that's kind of a a specific
example of a
a kind of an idea of these soft versus
hard limits where
you might have you know some some uh
some aspect of your system has been
guaranteed up to some soft limit so you
know will
will allow you to make api requests up
to 10 per second
uh and then if you go above that we'll
do our best but we don't make any
guarantees
um that kind of idea is also a really
interesting one to think about when
you're when you're designing
especially multi-tenant services and and
when you've got these shared resources
that you need to be able to manage
absolutely and coming back to the point
you mentioned earlier about things like
service bus and cosmos db
um that's pretty much how they work
right because they are multi-tenants in
nature as you mentioned and
you need to make sure that one noisy
neighbor isn't impacting
everyone else and i think that was one
of the things we said in the intro there
is that
patterns like this really help protect
different
tenants if you're building that software
as a service and have multi-tenanted
environments there absolutely yeah yeah
yeah and i mean another really good
example of that is uh sql
elastic pools uh in azure so that's that
kind of
that kind of design um again you can you
can put limits across
individual tenants across individual
databases
but then potentially allow them to kind
of burst above those a little bit as
well and
again if you've got the capacity sitting
there then you want to use it
but you also want to make sure that if
you are under load then
you're keeping control of that so that's
another really nice example of of using
that
the same kind of idea of throttling but
but not just you know
shutting down more requests
and then there's another angle to this
as well which i think that this
the design pattern does a really good
job of of mentioning which is
um illustrated in this diagram here
which isn't the clearest diagram
um but the the basic idea is that um
if you detect a throttling situation
then you can also think about this in
terms of kind of
short-term and long-term actions as well
so
in the short term you might just
basically say uh we're going to start
shutting down requests or we're going to
you know shut down features
uh whatever all the things we've talked
about so far but what you can also then
do is use that as a signal
to your uh to your system to say well
we're currently under a lot of load
maybe we need to scale right and it'll
probably take a little bit of time for
that scale to be
or that capacity to become available so
you'll keep throttling
until that capacity is available but
once you do
then you can then you can kind of take
the brakes off again and and see how
things go
so uh that's another really interesting
um uh aspect of the throttling pattern
as well is
that it's not just there to protect you
it's also giving you a bit of a signal
as well yeah it's it's almost acting as
a bit of a buffer there isn't it in
terms of right we can see the early
indications that
um we need to prepare the system for
something that's coming in
let's go ahead just temporarily leave
ourselves from actually having to take
all of that on
uh rate limits and then once we've got
the system to a state where we think we
can handle it
off we go here we go again we're back to
normal yeah and it's quite a nice
dynamic way isn't it rather than
like we said earlier that binary on off
it's then adjusting as you say
to some of those signals coming in nice
i like it yeah yeah
yeah yeah but i think that the key point
there then is that you need to really
design that up front right this isn't
something that you can just
throw in at the last minute um so again
requirements come into play here but
having the idea that you you want to
architect for these kinds of
uh that if you're going to be especially
if you're going to be doing any kind of
clever throttling around you know
turning off features dynamically or
re-prioritizing requests or applying
soft and hard limits or you know using
it as an auto scale signal
all of that requires that you really
think through how you're going to
achieve that
and make sure you're architecting for
that from the start um if you're just
doing raid limiting then that's that can
be a bit easier to kind of bolt on but
that's also kind of the most blunt
instrument you've got available to you
for this pattern
gotcha makes complete sense makes
complete sense
so i guess then where are the times
where i think we're about to go to
on the screen there and thinking about
some of the challenges maybe in some of
the times where it does make sense and
doesn't make sense i guess
we've hinted towards some of them for
example with um
you know multi-tenant scenarios where it
certainly makes sense but
are there times where maybe it doesn't
make so much sense and there may be some
issues in us going down that path yeah i
think there's
there's a few that come to mind so one
in particular is this point here which
is
um you might need to consider if you are
especially if you're gonna you're
you find yourself throttling a lot and
potentially unexpectedly throttling a
lot
maybe that's an indication that you you
actually need to scale your system
uh and you need to increase the overall
capacity um so again thinking of
throttling as a signal as much as it is
a
uh you know an action that you can take
um helps to really understand
you know if you're throttling every
single request because you're just
constantly trying to keep up with demand
then maybe you need to be increasing the
overall capacity and
and throttling is probably a bit
overkill for that scenario um
and i think we we also when we when we
start talking about the
uh the next two patterns retry and
circuit breaker which are kind of on the
the client side of this
equation um it's also clear that you you
start thinking when you start thinking
about those patterns
um the the way that the service can
signal back some of the information
about what's actually happening
is really important to the client as
well um so again you want to be very
clear about when and why you're
throttling
and you want to make sure that you're
sending the appropriate response
to the client so that they can
understand what's happening and they can
actually deal with that in a sensible
way
absolutely and yeah i like the idea that
you mentioned in the beginning there
that if we've got a
sustained amount of load which is coming
in and it's just now the norm and the
default
i think of this throttling approach is a
bit like you know when you play
the game monopoly and you've got your
get out of jail free card it's a little
bit like that isn't it
but if you've got that sustained period
of load coming in or sustained way of
working that
you find that throttling the system is
happening on a regular basis
that's a good indicator that actually
you need to look at something else there
yeah and equally if you're on the client
side and we'll talk about this a bit
more in a second but
if you're on the client side and you're
seeing that all of your requests are
getting throttled or a very large
proportion of them are getting throttled
uh maybe then you also need to look at
you know increasing the
the tier of the service you're talking
to or provisioning more capacity in the
service or whatever the case may be
um so that's an important uh kind of
corrode to the corollary to that as well
and i think the other the other point i
just want to re-emphasize here is that
you know
throttling especially when we talk about
those more complex
aspects of throttling really does need
to be designed in having said that if
you're just looking at doing rate
limiting and nothing else
you might be able to get by with
something like you know azure api
management or
front door both of which have the
ability to do
some level of rate limiting but again
those are going to be fairly
blunt in what they do they're just going
to send back a 429 to the client
and you know they'll reset counters and
that kind of thing for you uh
so it's really useful and it's a really
good backstop and i would generally say
if you are
building any kind of especially
public-facing application
you should have some rate limit in there
even if it's high
just as a matter of course um but
but yeah if you want to do anything more
sophisticated then you really need to
plan for that upfront
makes sense okay cool so so that's the
throttling side of things and i think
that's
you know that's really from the point of
view of the service right so if you're a
service designer if you're building an
api
or any other kind of service
multi-tenant or otherwise
uh throttling is is something that you
really want to consider but of course if
you're on the client side of this
equation
then you've got to figure out what to do
if you get throttled right and
um in in applications that are a lot of
customers that i work with
who have applications that weren't
originally designed for the cloud
um this is particularly a an interesting
point because
uh a lot of the time if applications
have been designed to run in a you know
on-premises environment or in a server
room in a
server closet or something um the the
number of things that can go wrong
in terms of the connection from you know
from server a to server b when they're
literally connected by a
one meter long ethernet cable uh it is a
lot smaller than when you deal with
the the very complex multi-tenant
environment of the cloud where you might
have service distributed across
multiple buildings multiple data centers
availability zones regions
with all sorts of networking and stuff
in between so
the scope of things that can go wrong in
the cloud is also much higher
and one of the things that i often see
with customers who who bring their
applications into azure who haven't
um haven't really thought this through
ahead of time is that they will
potentially
start seeing some problems where for
example they're trying to connect from
their application to their database
and it'll work 99.9 of the time
and then 0.1 of the time something will
just not quite work right
and if they haven't designed for that up
front using these patterns we're about
to talk
about uh then potentially they're going
to have a bad experience
and similarly if they if they're using
multi-tenant services like we've been
talking about
if those limit them in any way then then
they similarly are going to have
an application problem if they don't
design for that up front
so those next two patterns we'll talk
about retry and circuit breaker are
really there to
help the client to make sure they're
being sensible about how they deal with
those situations
yeah and i can only echo everything
you've said there john in terms of
the number of customers and clients that
we work with come in and have that
application they think they can just go
okay there we go but it's done it's in
the cloud
you know i think there was one slight
thing that you didn't say in there which
is this big
uh network called the internet as well
that we happen to have to use with the
cloud which is
extremely unreliable and uh you know
roots
might get changed roots might get
blocked um something might appear like
it's not there
for a certain time and then the next
millisecond it's actually back
uh we call those transient failures for
anyone who's listening in
and uh i think this is exactly where the
retry pattern can help isn't it so
yeah yeah very much as as we said
earlier one of those foundational
patterns to when you're building a
uh a cloud architecture and a cloud
application here
yeah absolutely yeah yeah and i think
it's yeah it's probably worth just kind
of delving into that idea of transient
failure transient false because
um that is such an important aspect of
designing for the cloud
um and it's i think one of the
principles that that i
think is a really important design
principle in the cloud is to not
try and paper over those kind of
scenarios and those
those situations and pretend they don't
exist and kind of
you know ignore them the way that we
actually achieve higher resiliency in
the cloud is to acknowledge that that
happens
and then to build in the resiliency
necessary in our solutions
uh so that if it does happen then we can
figure out what to do about it and so
that's where these kind of patterns
come in to really make uh to make that
possible um because it's not just about
you know you talked about the internet
and all of the
myriad things that can go wrong on the
internet but also i mean obviously we've
talked about throttling right that's a
that's another
at another time when you could
potentially have a request that's that's
failed for some reason
um but also there's you know there are
there are plenty of situations where
independent of the network failing a
particular service uh that you're
talking to or a particular
you know product in azure for example uh
might just stop responding for a period
of time
so i've actually pulled up the just as
an example i've pulled up the the
service level agreement for azure sql
database
which is a service that lots of our
customers use and
it's a it's long and i'm not going to
read it all but but the important thing
i wanted to
to kind of point out in here is if you
look down at the definition of what
downtime means for azure sql database
what it says is
a minute is considered unavailable for a
given database
if all continuous attempts by customer
to establish a connection to the
database within the minute fail
so what that means is that if you have a
failure of if the databases is
unavailable or you can't connect to it
for
58 seconds that's actually not
considered to be downtime
right so this is this is a normal
failure mode of of azure sql db
and so when you're architecting systems
for the cloud you really need to
understand
these kinds of failure modes and to
understand what kinds of things could
actually happen
uh and what points they're considered to
be normal and abnormal
um so if we look at sql database then
you know if you
have a situation where you you get a
failed request from your application
um then retrying that request for
example of up for a period of up to a
minute
uh is likely to succeed this is what
basically the sql team is telling us
here
so that's uh that's a really important
point to consider is
that yeah not only is it is it going to
be all these kinds of random things that
happen but
but also this is actually something
that's just part of the the way that the
cloud works
absolutely and also the the subtle point
in there as well that
if i am adopting the retry pattern and
my
first five attempts because you know
maybe i'm doing some kind of exponential
back off and uh
i can fit within 30 seconds those
retries of the five of them
um if those failed but then suddenly i
get one that works and then
uh another that doesn't then that resets
the timer as well and it's thinking
about those kind of scenarios about
we might even get into the world of
caching then at that point because
if that particular component fails
you've at least got a cache somewhere
else and
you i think your point is completely
valid going back to the failure mode
analysis effectively that
if that thing fails what is then the i
like to call it the blast radius what
what do we then need to think about as a
result of that so yeah really like that
point
yeah yeah and you actually you
introduced a really interesting
point there which was around exponential
back offs as well so i want to i
really want to delve into that a bit too
because um there's there's
i guess in my mind there's there's a few
different ways that you can retry
requests
and the retry pattern kind of captures
all of this so one is that
you immediately retry right if you have
a failure talking to a system
you don't wait you just immediately
retry depending on the reason
that that failed that that may or may
not be very likely to succeed
right so um in many cases an immediate
retry you know within a few milliseconds
uh probably the conditions that that
that led to that original request
failing
may not have been resolved yet so that
may or may not succeed
um but then there's another uh another
thing you can do which is to wait
right and this is where things get a bit
more interesting with the retry pattern
because
you can kind of just just wait you know
one second two seconds five seconds
just kind of a constant period of time
and and maybe allow for five retries
with five seconds apart
and if it if it fails after that then
fine that's that's just too bad we'll
throw an exception
and figure it out later um but but you
talked about exponential back off which
is another interesting strategy which is
where you
you wait increasingly long periods of
time between requests right so you give
the service
more of a chance to recover as you go
through each of those
each of those iterations of the loop
essentially um
but then there's another another thing
that you really need to consider here as
well which is that at some point
you need to give up right you will we do
need to allow for the fact that we're
not just
going to retry forever at some point in
time we need to basically say
no this this game over for this
particular transaction or request
uh we we need to to just give up and
again if we think back to
our favorite topic requirements this is
this is a really important point because
um if we if we're just looking at a
given little piece of code in isolation
we might just say well we're just going
to keep retrying forever if you look at
this from an architectural point of view
then maybe it's actually better to give
up sooner and to let the components
higher up in your stack or you know
other other parts of your infrastructure
or your client
uh give them the opportunity to recover
in some other way
so giving up and kind of just throwing
throwing the
the problem back to the client um isn't
necessarily a
problem it's just something that you
need to to be very conscious about you
know how
for how long will you retry what makes
sense and at what point should you give
up
and the answer to that might be very
different parts of your solution
absolutely and i i might slightly give
the game away here but i know we'll talk
about that in the next pattern then as
well because
uh that really does i guess
influence how we handle what we do from
the client side of things you know
if we can see that actually it's looking
like it's just going to keep failing
keep failing
there's no point overwhelming the system
because that's just going to exacerbate
even further potentially the problem
that
is happening with the service but uh
we'll park that one for now because we
will come back to a
circuit breaker which is kind of what
i'm explaining there so uh
yeah let's go off with the retry for now
yeah yeah yeah no that's that's a really
good point though i will come back to
that definitely
um and i think the the other thing to
bear in mind too is that like i said
before in the throttling pattern
um if a service actually is is clever
enough to be able to tell you
when its rate limit is going to be reset
um then that gives you a really nice
thing to be able to plug into your retry
logic right so if you
if you make a request the server says
i'm too busy to accept this request
uh but come back in 300 milliseconds
then you can wait 300 milliseconds
try again and then hopefully you've
you've kind of reduced
the number of retries that you're you're
you know attempting you've reduced the
amount of time that you need to waste
waiting for that um and and hopefully
your next request will succeed
there are many ways they can go wrong so
if you think about a database like
cosmos db which is a good one that does
this
um that's you know that it's going to be
giving you back an answer
based on what it knows at the point in
time when it calculated how long it
thinks you need to wait
but if at that 300 millisecond mark
suddenly there were a whole bunch of
other requests that came in
you might you might accidentally end up
in the back of the queue right so
um you can't guarantee that that is
absolutely going to be
uh a you know a definite uh
successful transaction at that point uh
but at least
some indication that that's you know
that's the minimum amount of time that
you'll need to wait at least
absolutely and it's interesting you
mentioned that because
i was just thinking the same myself and
that
actually when we're talking about
clients we don't necessarily mean you
know a
a client on my desktop or a web client
at all it could be
for example um a pattern we'll be
talking about uh in a couple of weeks
with will
is the cubase load leveling pattern and
competing consumers and those competing
consumers
when they're taking things from the
queue are effectively a client
potentially to like a database like you
were just saying with cosmos so
we should probably call that out that
client doesn't necessarily mean the
stereotypical guy that people mean yeah
browser or something yeah yeah exactly
no it could be
anybody that's that's making an outbound
request really um
that's that's kind of yeah and many
applications will both be clients and
servers
and we'll have to kind of think about
all of these patterns together right
um yeah and i think there's another
aspect to that as well which is
that the the retry pattern um so we've
talked about you know throttling we've
talked about transient failures
but that there's also a another type of
failure that we need to allow for which
is
kind of permanent failures right these
are these are failures either because
you know the services is completely dead
uh which does happen but it's
not too no cop too common or more likely
the request that we're making to the
server is never going to succeed
right so if you think about http and
http status codes
if i make a request to a server like a
post request and i get back
a 400 bad request what that that means
uh according to the http specification
is that
if i was to retry that request no matter
how many times i retry it
the server is not going to accept it
because something about the the way i've
formatted that request or the input i
provided whatever it is
is invalid and so there's actually no
fault on the server it's it's behaving
as it should
it's just that it's giving me an answer
that i don't necessarily want right um
there's something wrong with my code or
you know the way that i'm i'm working
with the service
um so we need to be really careful to
distinguish um
those kind of permanent failures from
the more transient failures like
you know like the networking issues like
services being down
like throttling um so and those those
second category are worth retrying and
and you know they
again depending on your requirements
depending on what you need to do
uh but for permanent failures you want
to make sure that you're not
retrying those unnecessarily because all
you're going to do is you know waste
your time and waste the service time
you're better off failing fast logging
that making sure that that's really
clearly
uh explained in your logs for example uh
or escalating to a human or whatever the
case may be
uh and then just considering that to be
that that's that's not going to be
successful
and and once again potentially
exacerbating uh
a problem there as well because uh
that's obviously going to take some
cycles from the server that your
or service you're trying to deploy to uh
to deploy two cents to
um and this is the challenge as well as
if you are having high loads and it's
this particular issue that's uh you know
not necessarily driving that problem but
it could be
somehow contributing to the problem as
well so uh yeah good good
there yeah yeah and actually i just want
to pick up on that point um chris
because
that's an interesting one around kind of
exacerbating problems for a server so
let's say that you've you've got an
application that uh
you know is talking to a server this an
api or something
um that api has a problem let's say it's
you know it's overwhelmed with requests
um and if our clients are uh just
basically just
retrying immediately like they're just
kind of going into a tight loop retrying
re-trying retrying retrying
and we have lots of those clients or
doing that um then potentially this
service is going to have a really hard
time recovering
because as soon as it makes any headway
into trying to to get on top of its load
it's suddenly inundated with a bunch of
requests from us
right and and we call this a retry storm
um so the again if you've got one of
those kind of retry
after response headers and the requests
and the response that that tells you to
come back later
then obeying that will help to that help
to do that but also you know exponential
back offs
and you know having a point at which you
say we're not going to keep retrying
those kinds of things are really
important as is not using
too lower an interval between these
retries so you need to have a little bit
of empathy for the
for the service you're talking to as
well and not just assume that i am the
most important
service that can possibly be talking to
you and you need to i'm just going to
keep
bothering you like a toddler until you
finally answer me um you know we need to
allow us some time and space to be able
to to recover and come back to
back to life again yeah absolutely
i think we're right encroaching closer
and closer to that next pattern aren't
we i think we are yeah i was just about
to say yeah so that that kind of leads
to this
this idea of the circuit breaker pattern
so i kind of think of this as like an
extension of the retry pattern right
it's it's a
it's a fancy retry pattern essentially
um so in the retro pattern we it's kind
of a
stateless pattern right we're mostly
stateless so we're we're basically just
saying i want to
to try the request and then if it fails
i'll wait some period of time and then
try again
and you know keep doing that for some
number of times and then maybe give up
in the circuit breaker pattern what
we're doing instead is
uh we're basically setting this thing
called a circuit breaker which is which
maintains some state
right um so if actually there's a good
diagram here i'll show you how that
works
um so if the uh if the um
if the client tries to to access the the
the resource like a database or an api
or some kind
um the circuit can be in what we call
the closed state
um so this basically sorry openstack
so service can be in the open state um
so the open state basically means
that the the request will will succeed
it will it will make its way through
as expected um and if everything is
happy and healthy then
the circuit breaker essentially just
allows the request all the way through
the response comes back everything's
good
but if there's some sort of problem in
the service like all the ones we've
talked about before
then the circuit breaker will basically
shut itself off right it will basically
say
what we're going to do is all of the
requests that are coming through at the
moment are going to just immediately
fail
so this is a client-side object of some
kind that essentially intercepts the
request on its way out
and just comes back and says look at the
moment the service you're trying to talk
to is not
accepting requests uh go away you know
maybe queue up this request for later
maybe do something to to kind of uh to
to to internally
retry until you get to a point where uh
we're
telling you it's okay and then at a
certain point
the circuit breaker will then decide
okay it's been long enough
i'm going to test the waters and see if
the service is back online
so what it might do then is going to a
half open state where it basically says
i'm going to just try letting some
requests through maybe one maybe a few
and if that request succeeds probably
the service is healthy again
and then i'll i'll eventually let
everything through but if that request
fails then i'll just say okay i'm giving
up again
i'm going to going to waste some time so
from the
from the point of view of of the the
client the circuit breaker becomes
essentially
almost like a proxy for the service and
what it's really doing is adding a whole
lot of intelligence
and state to basically keep track of the
state of that service and then to kind
of avoid unnecessarily
uh putting load on the service if it
can't cope with that gotcha
and you're completely right first time
around by the way with the closed uh
close state for being healthy
[Music]
so do i but the way uh the way i always
try to think about it for anyone
listening again is a bit like um
a circuit diagram and think about closed
as allowing the kind of current through
and open then
not allowing it through and that's the
only way in my mind that i can get
my mind around it because i'm like you i
always go open means okay we're open for
business let's go ahead and
exactly yeah but it's kind of the
opposite way around which
always gets me um but i guess i
mentioned the circuit diagram example
um the other example that is very
relevant in these times if you look
across the world with everything going
on with covid
is people truly government's trying to
control the spread of
covads and the infection rates they are
effectively using this kind of circuit
breaker pattern
if you look at whales where i'm from um
they called it a fire break for some
reason but effectively it's called a
circuit break
and they did the same thing they could
see cases rising and said right we're
temporarily going to put restrictions in
place bring that down control it don't
overwhelm the system
you know similar analogies right here
and now we'll open things back up again
and let things keep going
so just in case anyone's trying to get
some analogies to how this works
you know from circuit diagrams and uh
when you think of the circuit breaker in
your plugs that's exactly what we're
talking about here
same with uh what governments are doing
to control the spread of covid as well
yeah that's a good point yeah yeah um
and yet i think yeah i always with any
of these design patterns really any of
the ones
in the entire architecture i always try
and imagine kind of real world analogies
and i think that's a really good one
um you know cubase load leveling i
always think of the bank and you know
those kinds of things are a really good
analogy so it helps to kind of um think
through this
i'm not entirely sure how half open
circuits work in the real world
yeah yeah i was trying to think
but i gave up this so if anyone if
anyone listening in has an
analogy let us know because we would uh
we would love to hear that
yeah absolutely yeah um but yes i think
the the the
one of the key things to understand
about the the circuit breaker pattern is
well firstly it's it requires state
right so you do need to
to kind of the circuit breaker needs to
remember where
you know whether the service is up or
down and and what the kind of time frame
it should be looking at for retrying and
for allowing you know requests to go
through and that kind of thing
so it is a more complex pattern to
implement because of that reason
having said that there are some really
good implementations available
just kind of out of the box from various
solutions so
if we talk about just things like the
azure sdks as far as i know they don't
use circuit breaker pattern but they do
implement retry logic for you
um but then if you're if you're in the
dot-net world for example then the poly
library is a really good library to deal
with things like circuit breakers and
more complex retry
logic and that kind of thing um and then
if you there's also some interesting
ways of doing kind of distributed
um circuit breakers for you know for
more complex
uh kind of higher order systems using
things like
azure durable functions and durable
entities and and that kind of thing too
so
um you don't necessarily want to or
should uh be building
the stuff yourself um this some of this
logic is available to you in those kind
of forms as well
absolutely and there's an even another
interesting scenario as well just
given we're really in the depths of the
application design world here
um if you're going down a route like uh
using kubernetes as a platform and just
caveat here is that this is not the
single reason to use kubernetes by the
way so don't think right i've got this
scenario
i need to use it we see a lot of that so
i don't think this
but for example with kubernetes um one
of the common things that you can
implement on a kubernetes cluster
is a service mesh and this service bash
is uh
basically this kind of layer that you're
putting to intercept any kind of
networking call and you can do things
like observability
uh you can understand uh logic logging
and metrics and these kind of things
but one of the common examples is you
could implement some of these patterns
in that particular layer
so if you think about the distributed
scenario like you were just saying with
different microservices and we've got a
python.net uh ruby different
microservices because of course they
don't all need to be the same
same language and same framework as a
back-end developer we would potentially
have to re-implement those patterns with
every single
different framework and that's going to
be a lot of overhead on application
development teams but
with a service mesh you could implement
it at that layer it's consistently
applied then across all those
microservices as well so
again not a reason to go down that path
but just another good example
of what you were saying there john that
you don't always have to necessarily
implement this yourself
yeah i was actually just looking up to
see whether dapper also has a circuit
breaker in it um and that's apparently
some on their roadmap it's not there
today but
it's not a service mesh but it's kind of
gives you some of those same uh
qualities kind of takes care of some of
these these kinds of
non-functional concerns or you know
common concerns to a lot of a lot of
applications and a lot of
components uh so yeah any of these kinds
of things these are
these are solved problems right and you
want to try and make use of
of the really good implementations
really well tested implementations that
are already out there
uh rather than building it yourself
absolutely
and then one other thing i just want to
quickly throw in just before we finish
up is
um that with with retries and the
circuit breaker really
um it's it's important to remember that
as with as we're throttling
um when you run into these situations
where you're you're retrying requests or
your you know the circuit
is becoming open or half open um that
you
are not just treating this as a problem
to solve in your code but you're
treating that as some interesting
information some signals that you that
you can record
so i always suggest that if you if
you're logging uh if you're
retrying or if you're you're doing any
kind of circuit breaker um
code that you make sure you log
information about uh the fact that
you've
uh that you've retried how many attempts
um kind of if there's any more
contextual
information you can log to help
understand when that happened
because when you start to analyze that
in the aggregate um you might find for
example that
at certain times of the day we're having
to retry a lot more than others
or when we're accessing this one system
we have to log a lot
we have to retry a lot more than others
um and again if you're thinking about
this from the point of view of
managing capacity and making sure that
you've you've provisioned
uh the right kind of of capacity and
tears and everything for your services
you don't want to be throwing away
important information you want this
telemetry to be captured so that you can
uh you can proactively respond to it
absolutely and i think that's one of the
common
questions we get isn't it when we go
back to the r word requirements and we
ask you know
what is the level of load you're
expecting on the system is there that
seasonality
you kind of get this look of rabbit in
headlights like
uh okay don't you know i don't know when
they are
i can roughly tell you but specifics i'm
not sure and
this is exactly as you say a really good
way of just building upon that telemetry
and understanding are there
those seasonality pieces that uh
contribute to that problem
yeah absolutely yeah yeah that's good
cool yeah so i'm just trying to think of
i think we've done a pretty good job of
covering the basics of all of those
patterns i think um
yeah yes i guess indeed i guess um
probably a point for us to start
wrapping up here just looking at the
time
uh that we spent talking and again
another great session
um any last-minute kind of remarks or
things you just want to reiterate from
what we've been talking about there
overall there john
yeah i think for me the the these
patterns that we've talked about
especially retrained circuit breaker
are important patterns for anybody who's
developing against the cloud to
understand
i know that there are a lot of people
who are who consider themselves to be
developers
and not architects or you know not not
predominantly architects
and so they don't necessarily think
about you know reading architecture
design patterns and
thinking through architecture problems
and those kinds of things
um and that's that might be fair enough
if that's kind of not your your area
then that's that's all well and good but
these two patterns and there are others
as well uh are important patterns to to
understand they they
they're impacted by being in the cloud
but they really do have an impact on the
the code that you write
and the configuration that you apply to
your code and that kind of thing so
um i guess my point here is that these
patterns are patterns for everybody
uh who's working with the cloud not just
for people who are designing systems and
putting things on whiteboards excellent
really great final point there john
thank you um
so another great session thanks again
for joining john really appreciate
talking through these uh
these three patterns and i think uh
certainly the focus this thing will get
a lot of value so thank you again
thanks chris and until next time i'm
sure we'll
have some more to talk about